Alec Sczepanski
ATSC528
Assignment #1, Question 7



i) In general, there is a trough whose axis cuts through the Rockies and into the southwest, and a ridge whose axis cuts through the southeast through the lower Great Lakes region. In the analysis with ROI = 10 cm, zonal flow was present over central Ontario, Quebec, and the southern Hudson Bay, whereas the analysis with ROI = 20 cm continued the ridge into this region. Additionally, the latter analysis had a smoother 5400 m contour through British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan with a shortwave cutting through the northern halves of Alberta and Saskatchewan.

---

ii) The trough axis, and overall flow, is smoother and lower-amplitude in the analysis with ROI = 20 cm. In general, the analysis with ROI = 20 cm is smoother than the analysis with ROI = 10 cm. 

With a larger ROI, more observation points from further distances are taken into account when calculating the value of an analysis point. This creates greater overlap within radius circles from neighboring analysis points, meaning more observations are being used to calculate multiple analysis point values. This ends up reducing noise, but also "dampening" the observations, creating a smoother analysis.

---

iii) Within CONUS, away from the coasts, the analysis seems logical, however the analysis falls apart over water and into Canada where numerous contours are compounded in small areas, which is not realistic whatsoever. Based on the map of plotted observation points considered per analysis point, very few observations are taken into account where the contours are unrealistic. This is due to the sparsity of observations in these regions. The large distances between observations looks to introduce issues with finding a polynomial function to fit the observations properly, creating havoc (e.g. I spy an unrealistic 4140 m contour over northern Saskatchewan/Manitoba nowhere near an observation point).

---

iv) If it were guaranteed that there would be one observation point for each analysis point, mathematically it looks to make sense to be able to invert the 'R' matrix as long as the initial 'R' matrix has x_k = y_k = 0 to be False and the matrix has a rank of 6 (i.e. 6 independent rows and columns). Ultimately, if the determinant of the matrix = 0, then the matrix is NOT invertible. Otherwise, the matrix will be invertible.

Realistically, based off of some trial and error, there does not look to be an ROI small enough to capture only one observation point per analysis point. This is evident due to the existence of NaN values in the final 'R' matrix after inversion. 